---
title: V4 Hackathon 2016 by AT&T and ČTU
date: '2016-04-24 00:00:00 +0200'
tags: ['android', 'iot', 'hackathon']
image:
    feature: https://pbs.twimg.com/media/Cguk5hGW4AAMdsP.jpg:large
excerpt: I've taken part in this year's AT&T hackathon and it has been anamazing experience. 
---

I had a pop-up meeting with [Marek Lisý](http://mareklisy.cz/) last week regarding the app we created at [Prague Hacks](http://www.praguehacks.cz/) last June. And Marek told me about another hackathon happening on 22th and 23th April organized by AT&T and ČTU. I was thrilled and filled the application imediately. And here I am now. I'm still a little sleepy from yesterday, but feeling great. I am still processing the last day and half. I'll not describe the event itself but rather what happened in my head, my fears, the high points and the lows. Let me share the experience with you. 

## Friday morning

I arrived early around 9:30 to make sure I have time to get to know some new people before the hackathon begins. Meeting new people instead of those you know at conferences and meetings is a well proven technique I've learned from [Jeanne Trojan](http://www.jeannetrojan.com/) long time ago and it still works great. I obviously [couldn't keep this to myself](https://twitter.com/tomasfejfar/status/723426888446693376). 

Hackathon officially started with speeches from sponsors. And than there was [the infamous speech of Mr. Bělobrádek](http://www.vlada.cz/cz/clenove-vlady/pri-uradu-vlady/pavel-belobradek/aktualne/projev-vicepremiera-belobradka-na-v4-hackathonu--142815/), that caused [much controversy on Twitter](https://twitter.com/vytick/status/723430168455319552). Even though the speach really was kind of a mood killer, no one let it cloud the upcomming hours. Ideas for projects we could create started to emerge. At first I found it hard to come up with an idea myself. Therefore I was bit reluctant when Marcos asked who came alone to the hackathon and invited me to the podium when I raised my hand. Oddly enough I came up with an idea of traffic management app on the spot right there. 
 
After thinking the idea through I found it's not viable and impossible to pull out in the limited time. So back to square one. I visited each of the groups that emerged in the meantime and asked them about their idea. Some of them were tempting, but I decided that I'll come up with an idea of my own. While talking with guys from [kontakt.io](http://kontakt.io/) who brought the beacons for the hackathon I came up with an idea for indoor navigation that would be much cheaper and easier to set up than other solutions. Making indoor navigation available for SMBs and non-profits seemed like a viable idea. So I tried to pitch it to other attendees. But I had a hard time convincing them. So I took the opportunity to once again take the stage and [present the idea to everyone at once](https://twitter.com/ctu_cz/status/723438532727967744). After that I managed to put together a team. The countdown stared. 24:00:00, <small>23:59:59, <small>23:59:58, ...</small></small> 
 
## The team
 
Let me introduce the team members. Zbyněk Růžička and Ignác Csősz were both Java developers, but they had no prior mobile experience. Vítek Šimek was skilled in .NET, which felt like the worst tool for quickly putting together an API. Marton Tasnadi aka <abbr title="it seemed impossible to remember at first">"Kištaši"</abbr> was HTML coder with some PHP experience. My idea was to quickly put together simple API in node.js and Parse and focus on developing an app for Android. I have to admin that at first I thought the team was a bit weak. But I was soon to learn how wrong I was in underestimating them. 

I think of myself as quite a good developer. I present myself that way, so I usually become one of the devs on hackathons. Not this time though. Because I came up with the idea and strongly believed in it I chose the manager/team leader role and forbode myself from interfering with the development process. That was a completly new paradigm for me. I quickly identified the improtant things I need to take care of - team motivation, management and doing everything in my power to let the devs focus on the code. 
  
First I had to do the "boring stuff" - I created a [github repository for the project](https://github.com/tomasfejfar/inloki/) and a Google Docs file to collaborate on the specification. After that we could start working. And the team started to grow on me. Zbyněk and Ignác picked up the mobile app development. They made a very good decision to split the work. Zbyněk worked on the business logic that was decoupled from the app itself. While Ignác tried to hack together a prototype. That allowed them to move faster. In few hours we had a "hello world" app running on the phone and a basic app logic. Meanwhile Vítek worked on the API and admin section. He worked together with Kištaši to get started on the templates. I tried to keep everyone motivated and on track to the <abbr title="Minimum viable product">MVP</abbr>. In the meantime I tried to put together a pitch. Only technical work I allowed myself to do was helping with git issues (btw: helping people learn git is something I enjoy very much, so if you're struggling, feel free to [contact me](http://www.tomasfejfar.cz)). 

## The first pitch

Time flies. It was almost evening and time for the first pitch to a group of mentors. I was very nervous. 
 
> Hi, we’re InLoki, the indoor navigation for everyone. It surely happened to you as well. You need to go to the town hall to get your driving license, but you have no idea how to get to the right office. InLoki is here to help. It will describe the way to you as human would. Install the app and look for the InLoki sticker to get started, it’s usually right by the entry to the building.
>
> Inloki uses ibeacons on key intersections to let you know when to take the stairs or walk through long corridor. Compared to conventional indoor navigation systems it uses much fewer beacons and takes fraction of money and manpower to set up. 
>    
> Let me show you how it works.
> You get to the sticker and the app shows you the list of directions it knows. Great, it knows how to get to the podium from the back of the room. Let's pick it from the list. Now it gives you instructions on how to get to the next intersection. When you get there it vibrates to notify you to check the phone for the next direction. Only one left and you're at your destination. Welcome to the podium. 
>
> If you ever seen person using a navigation you probably noticed how they walk with their nose buried in the screen. Compare it to using inloki. It looks so natural.And it feels the same way.
>
> Inloki gives you directions as human would. 

They loved it. Had no comments whatsoever and told me to get back to coding. I was at the top of the world. 

When I returned to the team and told them the great news I learned that they made a lot of progress as well. Vítek used LINQ to filter the data for the API and was almost ready for the test run, Zbyněk had the model ready and Ignác made the app work with ibeacon SDK, so it recognized the beacons nearby. Great job! Everything was going according to the plan. 
 
## Plot thickens

Just around midnight we had another pitch dry-run. I presented the prepared pitch and the mentor was unimpressed. That was a shock for me. I still lived off the glow of the previous success. He liked the story, but not the product. 

> It's indoor navigation. It's something everyone does.
 
He was right. The only difference to the existing systems was the way it worked. That's not enough difference to impress anyone. It solved a problem that has already been solved by multiple existing businesses. We had to pivot. We presented him with the idea of the system being open and allowing anyone to create the waypoints. He saw the opportunity in owning the marked with crowdsourcing and we had the core of our next idea. 

We spend the following hours trying to pivot into something more unique and try to improve the tech demo at the same time. It was very tiring and painful process. The biggest struggle was with coming up with an idea that would work only indoors. Otherwise GPS would be much better alternative. Finally we had a viable idea, that worked well outdoors and indoors utilizing the strengths or our platform - crowdsourcing and working indoors. We put id down on paper, but all of us were too tired to come up with an actual pitch.  It was 04:00 and I was desperate for some sleep. At that point I was half asleep so crushing on a sofa at at-that-time closed and empty hotel bar seemed like a good idea - it was quiet and cozy there - great place for a quick nap. It did not seem as such a good idea little over an hour later when hotel security worker woke us up very harshly screaming.  

> "What the f$$k do you think you're doing here? Sleeping at hotel bar?"

Obviously it's not the best for a hotel image-wise to have bum-looking developers sleeping at it's bar. Luckily all of us were too tired and in shock from abrupt wake up, that we were unable to answer in any meaningful fashion. *"Yes, sorry, no, sorry, we are here, we go, sorry."* It took me good fifteen minutes to get back to shape and stop shaking - the sleep deprivation, too much sugar earlier and shocking wake up took its toll. 
  
## Intermezzo
  
I'd like to take the opportunity here to talk a little about the organization of the event. 

First - let me tell you, it was one of the best organized events I've ever been to. It was taking place in Hotel Pyramida. Picking a hotel for the event was a very good decision. The development hall was a big room with plenty of light and space. High ceiling offered lot of clean air even after many hours of brain activity :) There was a switch on each table and neatly packed ethernet cable. Internet was no problem whatsoever. Even the wifi worked great. I downloaded Android Studio (1.3GB) in almost no time at around 60Mbps. The mentors were great as well, appearing every now and then with good questions to put us on the right track. There was actually maybe too much feedback at some point (but more on that later). And the food. There was always enough food. Even at three in the morning there were some sweets and sandwiches. 
  
> Imagine you’re a teacher taking your class to museum. Making the visit fun for the kids can be challenging. With InLoki you can turn it into a treasure hunt. Would you like to take part? 3, 2, 1, Go! Here’s your first clue. “Find the bearded man of stone”. The app shows red - that means you’re not there yet. Yellow… Green! That’s it. The statue of Mr. Edison, the inventor. And here comes the next clue “At night it’s dark, but Mr. Edison’s spark, that’s your next mark..”. What could that be? Well, if you read the description carefully, you might get the answer. Dark? Spark? Of course! It’s the light bulb he invented. Let’s find it. Red, red, yellow, green! Here it is. Wow, did you know that it shined only for 40 hours before it broke? But not bad for the first try. Anyway, congratulation, you finished your first museum treasure hunt. 
> 
> Now imagine that finding the right door in office building can be also kind of a treasure hunt. So can be sightseeing the historic city centre. You can make buying toilet paper or flowers an adventure. It’s up to you what you make with InLoki. 
> 
> With InLoki mobile app you can make people follow your footsteps easily. Create a quest for others. Every step of the way you scan an iBeacon device either existing of you can bring your own beacon. Then add simple directions to the next step. You can make it a riddle if you feel like it. There are no mistakes with InLoki, only happy accidents. Share the created quest with your friends on Facebook and help us to make walking fun again. 

